Behaviour-Driven Requirements Engineering for
Agile Software Product Lines using Kanban method
Heba Elshandidy, Sherif Maze, Ehab Ezat Eman Nasr
Department of Information Systems
Faculty of Computers and Artificial Intelligence
Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt
helshandidy@pg.cu.edu.eg, {s.mazen, e.ezat}@fci-
cu.edu.eg Independent Researcher
Cairo, Egypt
nasr.eman.s@gmail.com
Abstract— Requirements engineering in agile product line en-
gineering has not yet addressed properly in the research commu-
nity in spite of its critical role in the success of a project. This
paper proposes a novel systematic flexible requirement engineer-
ing approach that enables agile-based organisation to establish
and maintain software product lines. The approach is mainly
based on behavior-driven development and the Kanban method.
We tested the approach empirically in an 8 years real-life indus-
trial case study and the results are encouraging. The findings
suggest the following: the approach is easy and quick to learn;
using specification by example yields consistent and up-to-date
user requirements and documentation; and the time-to-market is
substantially decreased. These results indicate that Kanban
method along with behaviour-driven development considerably
improved the requirements engineering process in agile product
line engineering.
Index Terms—Requirements engineering, behaviour driven
development, Kanban, agile product line engineering, empirical
study, agile software development
I. I NTRODUCTION
Requirements engineering (RE) is the process of defining,
documenting, and maintaining customers’ needs [1,2]. Accord-
ing to the studies of Linda Westfall [3] and the Standish Group
reports [4], eleven factors (see Fig. 1) leading to the success of
a software project were investigated and identified; eight of
them are RE-related. Thus, a good RE process producing a
complete, consistent, correct, and unambiguous user require-
ments highly increases the probablility of successfully deliver-
ing software projects on time. Ten of those identified factors,
on the other hand, exemplify the values of agile software de-
velopment (ASD). ASD is a group of software development
methodologies that is based on incremental and iterative deliv-
ery [5]. Unlike traditional development, ASD believes in reac-
tive iterative and incremental development in order to deliver
quick clean a working piece of software while involving stake-
holders throughout the different phases of development [5].
The overlapping of RE and agile factors, as shown in Fig. 1,
underlines their conformity in a sense that RE answers the
question of what needs to be done to have a successful project
while ASD offers the how.
Another notable advancement in software engineering is
software reuse [6]. Instead of building products from scratch,
assets from previous software projects can be refined and
reused. This has proven success in terms of productivity and
quality in software product lines (SPLs) [7]. A SPL is a set of
software-intensive systems, where their set of common
features targets specific needs of a particular business domain
while the variations of the same product are treated as a
product family [8]. SPLs use commonalities to increase the
level of software reusability and mass customisation while
decreasing costs and delivery time. This systematic
development of a product family considerably improves the
delivered quality when compared to individual customised
application [8]. Realising the advantages of ASD, as an
iterative paradigm, and SPL engineering, as a reuse paradigm,
in addition to the importance of RE in a project’s success,
made the need to investigate whether and how an effective RE
approach can be achieved to develop and maintain SPLs in an
agile-based environment indispensable. In this paper, we
describe a novel approach that enables agile-based
organisations to develop and manage SPLs in a systematic
lightweight fashion without risking the agility of their values
and practices. The work in this paper proposes a flexible
iterative incremental approach that reacts to unplanned
changes at any time of the project’s lifecycle. We evaluated
the feasibility of this approach, through a real-life empirical
study, in order to investigate its strengths and weaknesses.
Fig. 1. A Project’s success factors in relation to agile practices and RE
activitiesIn the following section, we briefly discuss agile product
line engineering, behaviour-driven development, and the
Kanban method. Section 3 presents relevant literature while
Section 4 discusses the proposed approach. Followed by
Section 5 that presents the real-life empirical study and finally
Section 6 concludes the paper and addresses the future work.
II. B ACKGROUND
A. Agile product line engineering
Agile product line engineering (APLE) is the resulting ap-
proach of integrating SPLE and ASD; the term was formally
coined in the first APLE’06 workshop in the 2006 SPL con-
ference [9]. In this workshop, it was acknowledged that both
ASD and SPLE approaches share several common goals, such
as managing changes in requirements, promoting product
quality, and reducing both cost and time-to-market, albeit
through different strategies [9]. Though there is a synergy be-
tween the two approaches, addressing each other’s weakness-
es, there exists difficulties in their integration. For example,
the strategy used to handle requirements changes, the degree
of focus on documentation, the level of user involvement re-
quired, or the different development roles involved [10].
A typical SPL has two phases: domain engineering (DE)
and application engineering (AE) [8]. While the former phase
focuses on conducting a comprehensive domain analysis to
specify scope, core assets, and variations, the latter focuses on
building individualised products based on the defined core
assets and the identified variation points for that specific prod-
uct [11]. When building a SPL, there are three widely recog-
nised approaches, with respect to investment in cores assets, to
choose from; proactive, reactive, and extractive [ 12 ]. Unlike
the term reactive in ASD, the PL reactive approach does not
treat each undertaken product as a new and relatively unique
product [12]. It still treats it as a part of the already planned
products in the family but instead of implementing the whole
family at the beginning, the family is built in increments. SPL
reactive approach does not react to the changes of the custom-
er’s requirements [12]. Generally, SPLs use core assets to in-
crease the level of software reusability and mass customisation
while decreasing costs and delivery time. This systematic de-
velopment of a product family considerably improves the de-
livered quality when compared to individual customised appli-
cations [8].
B. Behaviour-Driven Development
Behaviour-driven development (BDD) is a software
development process that encourages collaboration between
different stakeholders (i.e. developers, testers, and non-
technical/business personnel) of a software project [13]. It was
created to overcome the shortcomings of test-driven
development (TDD) such as the starting point of testing, what
to test and what not to test, how much to test in one iteration,
how to understand why a test fails, as well as the lack of
naming conventions for tests [13]. BDD combines the general
methods and practices of TDD with concepts from domain-
driven design and objected-oriented analysis and design. Thus,
a shared process and understanding to all the involved
stakeholders, is provided to successfully collaborate on
software development with well-defined outputs [13]. BDD
delivers working and tested software while managing
traceability between the different artefacts [13].
BDD has six main characteristics: ubiquitous language
[14], iterative decomposition process [15], plain text
description for user story and scenario templates [16],
executable acceptance tests (EATs) with mapping rules
[13,17], readable behaviour oriented specification code [13],
and cross-cutting the different activities of software
development [13]. BDD emphasises the production of a
concise clear user requirements and a live documentation
while efficiently maintaining traceability relations in an agile-
based product line. This is achieved through the use of
specification by example (SBE). According to Gojko Adzic
[18], “SBE is a set of process patterns that facilitate change in
software products to ensure that the right product is delivered
efficiently”. In BDD, SBE is used to illustrate the behaviour of
the system; they are written before writing the code using the
ubiquitous language. They also can be used as a direct input
into building automated tests reflecting the business domain.
Automated testing makes it feasible to run the tests as many
times as needed against the written code to verify and validate
a feature completion.
C. The Kanban Method
Kanban is a lean workflow management method that is de-
signed to help visualise work, maximise efficiency, and be
agile [19]. It started as a scheduling system for lean manufac-
turing originating from the Toyota Production System. It is an
incremental evolutionary method which adopts the pull system
approach (i.e. production is based on the customer’s demand).
This minimises wasting activities without sacrificing produc-
tivity while creating more value for the customer without gen-
erating more costs. Kanban has four core principles: (1) start
with what you do now; (2) agree to pursue incremental evolu-
tionary change; (3) respect the current process, roles, and re-
sponsibilities; and (4) encourage acts of leadership at all levels
[19]. It, also, adopts six practices: (1) visualise your workflow;
(2) limit work in progress; (3) manage flow; (4) make process
policies explicit; (5) feedback loops through stand-up, service
delivery review, operations review, and risk review meetings;
and (6) improve collaboratively using models and the scien-
tific method [19]. The simplest form of applying Kanban is
sticky notes on a white board. Modern-day Kanban, however,
uses software tools to allow easy access for remote team
members, perform flow analytics, and automate workflow in
addition to the ability of integration with other tools.
III. R ELATED W ORK
The research instrument used for this section is literature
review. To guarantee high quality work, papers were fetched
only from electronic databases such as Inspec, IEEE Xplore,
SpringerLink, SpringerLink, ScienceDirect, ACM Digital
Library, and ISI Web Knowledge. The main focus of the
search was the proceedings of Software Product Line
Conference, Agile Conference, eXtreme ProgrammingConference, Agile Product Line Engineering Workshop, and
Requirements Engineering Conference.
In spite of the rich APLE literature [20-41], none was able
to address RE in an all-inclusive manner [42-46]. Nearly all
the work in the literature focused on one or two RE activities
such as: scoping [20], planning [21,22], modelling [23], PL
architecture design [24,25], traceability and management [26-
30], and variability identification and management [31-35].
Only the work of the authors in [36,37] proposed a holistic
framework called APLE-RE. That framework recommends a
set of RE techniques and process patterns based on the nature
and the characteristics of a given project. APLE-RE is com-
posed of two phases: a) knowledge acquisition where expertise
is collected from researchers and practitioners using agile and
PL RE techniques; and b) process repository where a set of
process patterns, based on the collected expertise, is offered to
requirements engineers to choose from or tailor a pattern for
the respective agile PL project. Despite the potentiality of the
APLE-RE, it was an unrealistic framework. For example, the
framework was domain-specific with no general data source.
In addition, the authors were able to validate only 2 out of 171
process patterns, they originally identified, due to time and
cost concerns. Not to mention that that validation did not de-
pend on any formal methods; it was subjective. Furthermore,
data was collected from project managers only rather than all
the involved stakeholders, which is not only in a direct contra-
ry to the agile principles but also did not reflect the complete
and comprehensive perspective of the involved participants.
Another effort in the literature is accredited to the authors
of [38-41] where they presented a reactive variability man-
agement framework to lower the adoption barrier of SPLs in
agile environments. The authors highlighted the importance of
having a systematic approach to reactively define commonali-
ty, variability, and software reuse in SPLs while guaranteeing
high quality by validating the finished work through executa-
ble acceptance test and test-driven development. Nonetheless,
the proposed framework was not tested in a real project but
was rather rested through academic case studies. As a further
of matter, the work was not even tested in a holistic manner in
order to be able to report how the different components of the
framework interplays. And lastly, the robustness and effec-
tiveness of the framework were not tested in a large-scale en-
vironment.
Unlike the presented literature, except for the work pre-
sented in [38-41], our proposed approach places emphasis on
developing SPL in an agile environment and not the other way
around where some agile practices are adopted in an already
existing SPL environment. Additionally, none of the efforts
presented in this section covered all the phases of RE, or con-
ducted real-life empirical studies to validate their work, or
attempted the use of BDD and the Kanban method to develop
and maintain an agile-based PL. While these contributions are
interesting attempts to address RE in APLE, their focus is dif-
ferent from ours. The work presented in this paper focuses on
using BDD and the Kanban method to produce a comprehen-
sive lightweight RE approach. That approach reactively and
incrementally establishes and manages SPLs in agile-based
organisations regardless of the level of their SPL domain ex-
perience. To the best of our knowledge, this research focus is
original and has not been previously discussed in the literature.
IV. T HE P ROPOSED A PPROACH
Producing a concrete, complete, and unambiguous
requirements has always been a hard task to achieve in SPLs.
Though bringing ASD into the scene made the task more
feasible, there is still few challenges: (1) efficiently and
effectively eliciting and communicating cores assets and
variability to stakeholders; (2) traceability of core assets and
variability from the requirements to the core; (3) managing
and tracking cores assets across different products in the
family; and (4) having an up-to-date documentation. In this
paper, we introduce a RE approach addressing the
aforementioned challenges. This idea was initially introduced
in our previous work in [47]. The approach is based on BDD
and the Kanban method. It covers the five activities of the RE
process for functional and non-functional requirements. This
section describes how RE, the Kanban method, and BDD
interplay.
A. Implementing requirements engineering within behaviour-
driven development
The RE process relies on the notion that business goals are
already identified. Business goals (functional and non-
functional) are usually derived from the business need to find-
ing solutions for a specific business problem. The discussion
to follow assumes that business goals are available for the
team to start their RE process. Fig. 2. offers an in-depth look
of how the BDD set of process patterns are implemented
throughout the five activities of the RE process. For each ac-
tivity, the inputs and outputs are presented while highlighting
which role does what task. Each RE activity is addressed in
further details as follows:
• Step 1: Requirements elicitation: this is the first step in
the RE process where the work starts outside-in. The
customer’s representatives and the development team
conduct collaborative meetings to brainstorm solutions
achieving the requested business goals. Collaborative
meetings intend to get everyone involved in the prod-
uct to share their perspective, have a common under-
standing, and feel ownership. After these meetings, the
development team uses low/high fidelity prototyping to
examine the validity of the proposed set of solutions
hypotheses. After negotiations and reaching a consen-
sus on the relevant solutions set, stakeholders conduct
collaborative meetings for scoping. Scoping is the pro-
cess of determining the set of features reflecting the
system goals. In this paper, we use the term feature to
refer to an independent functionality in the system de-
livering a business value [48]. There are no constraints
on the size of a feature as long as the customer consid-
ers it an added value to the delivered system. Internal-
ly, however, product owners in collaboration with de-
velopers often choose to slice down feature into sub-
features. Thus, making it more manageable, testable,
and releasable within a cycle time. The development•
•
team has to make sure, however, that the slicing did not
affect the behaviour of the original feature. The initial
set of features, that should be developed in the next cy-
cle time, is determined after negotiations in collabora-
tive meetings where all the stakeholders are encour-
aged to attend.
Step 2: Requirements analysis: the new elicited fea-
tures along with existing features, from previous prod-
ucts in the family, are further analysed and negotiated
to identify potential core assets and variabilities. These
negotiations take place through the specifications
workshops (aka Three Amigos meeting). The Three
Amigos are the business analyst (BA), the quality as-
surance (QA) personnel, and the developer. Though
other stakeholders are encouraged to attend these
workshops but only the Three Amigos are responsible
and accountable of the features from their definition to
their delivery. During these workshops, features are
examined to determine their relevancy and clarity. If a
missing requirement or an irrelevant/unclear feature is
determined, the process goes back to the first step for
further understanding. Otherwise, the process proceeds
to requirements modelling. The Three Amigos use a
ubiquitous language and a domain vocabulary (a glos-
sary is maintained if required) to establish a common
understanding of the requirements; this helps them lo-
cating differences and conflicts. The output of this ac-
tivity is a set of user stories for each feature. A user
story describes an activity that is done by a user in a
given role. When the word “optional” is added to the
description of a user story, it means that that user story
represents a variability rather than a core asset feature.
Step 3: Requirements modelling: in addition to using
diagrams to model the requirements, the developing
team uses examples to elaborate the user stories pro-
duced from the previous step. In this step, each identi-
fied user story is illustrated with a set of examples rep-
resenting real cases. Examples are written in the form
of a scenario with actual values. A scenario describes
how the system should behave when it is in a specific
state for a specific feature and a specific event happens.
Scenarios exemplify the behaviour of the system while
acting as the acceptance criteria of that system. The
development team continues to discuss examples until
reaching an agreement on the set of examples covering
the expected behaviour of each feature. These scenari-
os should represent 5 or 6 key examples, 1 – 3 end-to-
end flows, in addition to the edge cases, so that it is
clear what is expected from each feature. Using actual
values in scenarios help identifying the variants of each
variation point in a product line. After negotiations, the
development team produce the initial set of scenarios;
in case a perplexing core asset or variant is identified,
the team decides whether they need to go back to the
requirements analysis activity, for further investigation,
or to proceed to the next step.
•
•
Step 4: Requirements verification and validation: the
three Amigos meet again to refine the developed key
example scenarios based on their relevancy and im-
portance. To ensure that a scenario passes, all the test
cases for that scenario must pass. In order to achieve
that, one need to be precise in writing the examples. If
an example turns to be complex, it can be sliced into
simpler examples. Focus should always be on the busi-
ness rather than the technical perspective. Following
the standardised mapping rules of BDD, when map-
ping from scenarios to test cases, guarantees a better
traceability management. Scenarios should consider
both negative and positive conditions while specifying
any additional business rules if needed. Non-functional
scenarios – addressing performance, security, usability,
etc. – should be covered as well if they reflect a busi-
ness value for the customer. All these examples are ne-
gotiated and discussed with the customer in order to be
filtered to only those in which the customer is interest-
ed. In case an anomaly is detected in this activity, the
three amigos may decide to go back to the require-
ments modelling or to the initial requirements elicita-
tion activity. After deciding the final set of scenarios,
the development team automates them; this is done
through wiring the specifications to the system under
test. Each automated specification represents an ac-
ceptance criterion of the system that is linked to an ex-
ample of the behaviour of that system. That connection
helps later on with managing traceability between the
different artefacts of the system. The output of this step
is the actual implementation of variation points and
variants at the code level.
A cross-cutting step: Requirements management: re-
quirements are maintained and managed throughout
Fig. 2. The implementation of the five RE activities in BDDeach activity of the RE process. Executable specifica-
tions, in particular, benefit requirements management
in multiple aspects. For one, it produces an evolving
live documentation where all the core assets, variabili-
ties, and the associated variants are documented and ef-
ficiently managed. Secondly, it delivers a continuously
validated system that is constantly evolving to meet the
required business goals. Finally, it allows to test and
integrate the frequent software increments as many
times as needed in a lightweight manner. When a
change (e.g. adding/removing a feature/user sto-
ry/scenario) is introduced into the system, it is checked
against the business goals to determine its validity. The
steps in Fig. 2 are carried out in an iterative and incre-
mental fashion.
B. Implementing the Kanban method within behaviour-driven
devlopment
Kanban and BDD advocate the same core principles of in-
cremental iterative development and starting with what need to
be done in the next cycle time. They also share the common
fundamentals of delivering value to customers as fast as possi-
ble, ensuring that everyone shares a common understanding
and well-aware of the process policies, boosting collaboration
and productivity, and bringing flexibility on board. Bringing
Kanban and BDD together gets the team to be more responsive
while reinforcing the involvement of customers from the be-
ginning of the project until it is finished. Furthermore, Kanban
allows the team to (1) locate and alleviate bottlenecks in the
workflow as early as possible; (2) prevent overloading the
work processes; and (3) prevent constant context switching
between work items. Using Kanban boards allow the team to
explicitly state the mapping rules and the ubiquitous language
of BDD in the process policies. Thus, offers a quick easy refer-
ence/reminder for stakeholders whenever needed. Using Kan-
ban software tools also allow team members in large scale pro-
jects to communicate effectively regardless of their location.
Even when a team member misses one of the feedback meet-
ings, they can still know the latest updates in the project by
visiting the Kanban board at any time. Kanban and BDD com-
plements each other to deliver the most value to the customer at
the nearest possible time.
V. E VALUATION : A R EAL -L IFE E MPIRICAL S TUDY
In the previous section, we presented a methodology to
produce and manage RE using BDD and the Kanban method.
Here, we present an evaluation to investigate the feasibility and
usefulness of our proposed approach. The research instruments
used in this real-life empirical study varied from direct obser-
vation, structured observation, observer participant, to discus-
sion groups based on our level of understanding and familiarity
with the product under study. We tested the proposed approach
in a small-sized start-up agile-based company with an intensive
experience in agile development. The company adopts both the
Kanban and the Scrum agile methods. The company focus on
the main practices of iterative and incremental development,
refactoring, automated testing, short iterations, self-organising
cross-functional teams, pair programming, continuous deploy
Fig. 3. A feature file in Cucumber
Fig. 4. Steps Definition
ment, progressive discovery, user story maps, and Objectives
and Key Results (OKRs). The product under study, Revosuite,
is an AI-enabled CRM/CLM/BI system for pharmaceutical and
life sciences businesses; it is a Business-to-Business Enterprise
SaaS. The Revosuite team embraced our proposed approach as
it adds no burden on them since it shares the same essence of
their already existing agile practices.
As BDD is the core of the proposed approach, we consid-
ered a common tool to write and run SBE called Cucumber
[49, 50]. Cucumber is a supporting toolkit for BDD; it uses a
language called Gherkin to define test cases. Gherkin is a hu-
man readable non-technical language that provides a script for
automated testing [49]. This facilitates the production of a sim-
ple documentation of the code under test [49]. This means that
the system's specifications are maintained alongside the system
codebase in the same version control repository. As shown in
Fig. 3, each feature contains a list of scenarios; hence, each
feature will have more than one automated specification/testing
case. In Cucumber, each feature under test along with its op-
tional description and the associated list of scenarios are stored
in a file called a feature file. To link these test cases to the actu-
al code, Cucumber uses a step definition. A steps definition file
stores the mapping between each step of the scenario defined in
the feature file with the code of the function to be executed. As
shown in Fig. 4, when Cucumber executes a step of a scenario,
it scans the step definition file and figures out which function is
to be called. In this empirical study, Kanban was implemented
using the Trello software [51].
A. Goal
The goal of this empirical study is to examine the applica-
bility of the proposed approach in a real-life industrial case
study. The elements to be studied are deduced from the essence
of BDD and the Kanban method. In particular, we are examin-TABLE I.
T ABLE 1. T HE STUDY ELEMENTS AND THE REQUIRED
OBSERVATIONS
Element
Required Observation
Evolution We will observe whether the participant will be able
to start a feature and integrate new changes as they
arise. The final state of the feature should be
consistent with the behaviour expected by the
customer
Learnability We will observe if the participants will be able to:
• use the BDD ubiquitous language to write features,
user stories, and scenarios;
• use specifications by example as the building units
of the proposed approach; and
• use mapping rules to relate automated tests to the
respective scenarios and user stories.
Coherence We will observe whether the participant will be able
to effectively communicate and share a consistent
output compared to the demanded business goals.
Restrictions/
Conflicts We will observe if the participant will be able to
deduce all explicit and implicit restrictions and
conflicts from the automated specifications by
example.
Readability We will observe whether the participant will be able
to understand the code in the system’s
documentation.
ing five elements: learnability, evolution, consistency, re-
strictions/conflicts, and readability. Error! Reference source not
found. lists these elements and the required observations for
each one of them to this study. The participants in this study
were selected from the pool of people who worked on the de-
velopment and maintenance of Revosuite except for the partic-
ipants representing customers. The total number of participants
is 23 categorised as follows: 5 business analysts, 10 developers,
and 5 testers, and 3 customer’s representatives. Of course, the
development team worked interchangeably but they witnessed
the changes and differences in development throughout the
lifetime of the Revosuite product family. After explaining the
proposed approach to the participants, they were offered a
training on how to implement BDD along with Kanban. To
observe the performance of the participants, they took part in
multiple pilot projects, varying in complexity, throughout the
lifetime of Revosuite. We, also, developed a questionnaire ad-
dressing the elements listed in Error! Reference source not
found. in further details and asked our participants to fill it in.
B. Pilot Projects Results
The performance of the participants was measured by the
time they spent on each feature and the consistency of their
outcome compared to that expected by the business goals. Nat-
urally, pilot projects with higher complexities took more time
from the participants. The consistency of their outcomes, how-
ever, was mostly the same except for the participants represent-
ing customers; they had some difficulties with complexed fea-
tures. In low-medium complexed pilot projects, we observed
that more than 80% of the participants were able to start a fea-
ture that eventually evolve into either a core asset or a variabil-
ity. They were able to integrate changes as they come where
the final state of a feature was consistent with the behaviour
expected by the customer. For learnability and coherence, all
the development participants were able to achieve the three
aspects under learnability and having consistent output with
minor differences. Customers’ participants, on the other hand,
were above average at the second and third aspects of learnabil-
ity while they excelled in using the BDD ubiquitous language
and producing consistent output to that of the expected one by
the business goals. Though all the participants were able to
detect explicit constraints and underline conflicts, only 70% of
them were able to spot implicit restrictions. Nevertheless, all
participants were able to easily read and understand the docu-
mentation. For high complexed pilot projects, the observation
was reasonably in-line with the one of low-medium complexed
pilot projects except that more time was needed on each feature
and the performance of the customers’ participants was de-
creased by nearly 20%.
C. Questionnaire Results
Due to the diversity background of the participants, every
one answered from their perspective. Error! Reference source
not found. presents the responses to the Likert-scale questions.
A collaborative opinion was reached that: a) requirements were
concise, complete, and unambiguous; b) everyone understood
better what is being developed; c) developers were able to bet-
ter track the development progress; d) testers had a clearer un-
derstanding about what is being tested as they were involved
from the beginning and had a role in the design; e) a quality
product is produced from the beginning; and f) documentation
was read by everyone and was constantly up-to-date. Repre-
senting the system features using SBE, however, was confusing
and out of the comfort zone of some of the customer represent-
atives, analysts, and testers.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
The paper contributed a novel approach to requirements
engineering in agile software product lines. The approach ena-
bles agile organisation to systematically and effectively devel-
op and manage agile-based product lines.
Fig. 5. The questionnaire Likert-scale responsesThe authors introduced the collaboration of behavior-driven
development and the beginning through fostering early-on
collaboration and communication. Thus, a lot of resources -
such as time and money - are spared compared to the conven-
tional product line development methods. The proposed ap-
proach is tested and validated in a real-life industrial case
study. The empirical study that spanned over 8 years reported
very promising and positive results. The main findings of the
study were the feasibility to produce well-defined concrete
R EFERENCES
[1] Kontonya, G., Sommerville, I.: Requirements Engineering:
Processes and Techniques. John Wiley & Sons. (1998).
[2] Chemuturi, M.: Requirements Engineering and Management
for Software Development Projects. Springer Publishing
Company. (2012).
[3] Westfall, L.: Software Requirements Engineering: What, Why,
Who, When and How?. Retrieved from
http://www.westfallteam.com/Papers/The_Why_What_Who_
When_and_How_Of_Software_Requirements.pdf, last ac-
cessed 2018/11/12
[4] Standish Group, The CHAOS Report 2015, Retrieved from
https://www.standishgroup.com/sample_research, last accessed
2015/10/2
[5] Williams, L., Cockburn, A.: Agile Software Development: It’s
About Feedback and Change. Computer 36(6), 39–43 (2003).
[6] Jacobson, I., Griss, M., Johnson, P.: Software Reuse: Architec-
ture, Process and Organization for Business success. ACM
Press. USA (1997)
[7] Mili, H., Mili, F., Mili, A.: Reusing Software: Issues and Re-
search Directions. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
21(6), 528–562 (1995).
[8] Clements, P., Northrop, L.: Software Product Lines: Practices
and Patterns. Addison-Wesley. USA (2001).
[9] Cooper, K., Franch, X.: APLE First International Workshop on
Agile Product Line Engineering. IEEE Computer Society. pp.
205–206. Silver Spring, USA (2006).
[10] Hanssen, G.k., Fægri, T.E.: Process Fusion: An Industrial
Case Study on Agile Software Product Line Engineering.
Journal of Systems and Software 81(6), 843–854 (2008).
[11] Pohl, K., Böckle, G., Linden, F.: Software Product Line Engi-
neering: Foundations, Principles and Techniques. Springer.
Germany (2005).
[12] Mcgregor, J.:Agile Software Product Lines, Deconstructed.
Journal of Object Technology 7(8), 7 – 19 (2008).
[13]
Behavior
Driven
Development,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behavior-driven_development,
last accessed 2018/1/1
[14] Evans, E.: Domain-Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in
the Heart of Software. Addison-Wesley Professional. Germany
(2003)
[15]
North,
D.:
Introducing
BDD.
Available
at:
http://dannorth.net/introducing-bdd (2006)
[16] Chelimsky, D., Astels, D., Helmkamp, B., North, D., Dennis,
Z., and Hellesoy, A.: The RSpec Book: Behaviour Driven De-
velopment with Rspec, Cucumber, and Friends. 1st ed. Prag-
matic Bookshelf. (2010)
[17] Astels, D.: A new look at test driven development.
http://techblog.daveastels.com/files/BDD_Intro.pdf, last ac-
cessed 2019/3/1
user requirements for an agile software product line while cut-
ting cost and time-to-market. Future work includes conducting
an empirical research to further investigate the industrial case
study presented in this paper.
A CKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Revosuite company for
their cooperation and guidance.
[18] Adzic, G.: Specification by Example: How Successful Teams
Deliver the Right Software. Manning Publications. (2011)
[19] Hammarberg, M., Sunden, J.: Kanban In Action. Manning
Publications. (2014)
[20] Noor, M.A., Rabiser, R., Grünbacher, P.: A Collaborative
Approach for Reengineering-Based Product Line Scoping. In:
1st International Workshop on Agile Product Line Engineering
(In conjunction with SPLC), USA (2006)
[21] Noor M.A., Rabiser, R., Grünbacher, P.: Agile Product Line
Planning: A Collaborative Approach and a Case Study. Journal
of Systems and Software 81(6), 868–882 (2007)
[22] Noor, M.A., Grünbacher, P., Hoyer, C.: A Collaborative
Method for Reuse Potential Assessment in Reengineering
Based Product Line Adoption. In: Balancing Agility and For-
malism in Software Engineering. LNCS, vol. 5082, pp. 69–83.
Springer, Heidelberg (2008)
[23] Trinidad, P., Benavides, D., Durán, A., Ruiz-Cortés, A., Toro,
M.: Automated Error Analysis for the Agilization of Feature
Modeling. Journal of Systems and Software 81(6), 883–896
(2008)
[24] Paige, P., Wang, X., Stephenson, Z., Brooke, P.: Towards an
Agile Process for Building Software Product Lines. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 7th International Extreme Programming and
Agile Processes in Software Engineering, pp.198–199. Spring-
er, Heidelberg (2006)
[25] Kakarontzas, G., Stamelos, I., Katsaros, P.: Product Line Var-
iability with Elastic Components and Test-Driven Develop-
ment. In: Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on
Computational Intelligence for Modelling Control and Auto-
mation, pp. 146–151. IEEE Computer Society, Austria (2006)
[26] Raatikainen, M., Rautiainen, K., Myllärniemi, V., Männistö,
T.: Integrating Product Family Modeling with Development
Management in Agile Methods. In: Proceedings of the 1st In-
ternational Workshop on Software Development Governance,
pp. 17–20. ACM, USA (2008)
[27] Taborda, L.: The Release Matrix for Component-Based Soft-
ware Systems. In: Proceedings of Component-Based Software
Engineering, LNCS, vol. 3054, pp. 100–113, Springer, Heidel-
berg (2004)
[28] Kurmann, R.: Agile SPL-SCM Agile Software Product Line
Configuration and Release Management. In: 1st International
Workshop on Agile Product Line Engineering (In conjunction
with SPLC). USA (2006)
[29] Carbon, R., Lindvall, M., Muthig, D., Costa, P.: Integrating
Product Line Engineering and Agile Methods: Flexible Design
Up-Front VS. Incremental Design. In: Proceedings of the 1st
International Workshop on Agile Product Line Engineering (In
conjunction with SPLC). USA (2006)
[30] Carbon, R., Knodel, J., Muthig, D., Meier,G.: Providing
Feedback from Application to Family Engineering – The
Product Line Planning Game at the Testo AG. In: Proceedings
of the 12th International Software Product Line Conference,
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 180–189. IEEE, Ireland (2008)[31] O’Leary, P., Babar, M.A., Thiel, S., Richardson, I.: Product
Derivation Process and Agile Approaches: Exploring the Inte-
gration Potential. In: Proceedings of the 2nd IFIP Central and
East European Conference on Software Engineering Tech-
niques, pp. 166–171 (2007)
[32] O’Leary, P., Babar, M.A., Thiel, S., Richardson, I.: Towards
Agile Product Derivation in Software Product Line Engineer-
ing. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Rap-
id Integration of Software Engineering Techniques, pp. 19–32
(2007)
[33] O’Leary, P., Thiel, S., Botterweck, G., Richardson, I.: To-
wards a Product Derivation Process Framework. In: Proceed-
ings of the 3rd IFIP TC2 Central and East European Confer-
ence on Software Engineering Techniques, pp. 189–202 (2008)
[34] O’Leary, P., McCaffery, F., Richardson, I., Thiel, S.: Towards
Agile Product Derivation in Software Product Line Engineer-
ing. In: Proceedings of the 16th European Conference on
Software Process Improvement, pp. 81–86 (2009)
[35] O’Leary, P., Rabiser, R., Richardson, I., Thiel, S.: Important
Issues and Key Activities in Product Derivation: Experiences
from Two Independent Research Projects. In: Proceedings of
the 13th International Software Product Line Conference, pp.
121–130 (2009)
[36] Feng, K., Lempert, M., Tang, Y., Tian, K., Cooper, K.,
Franch, X.: Developing a Survey to Collect Expertise in Agile
Product Line Requirements Engineering. In: Agile 2007 Con-
ference. International Research-in-Progress Workshop on Ag-
ile Software Engineering. pp. 1–4 (2007)
[37] Feng, K.: Towards an Agile Product Line Requirements Engi-
neering Framework: Knowledge Acquisition and Process Def-
inition, Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Texas at Dallas
(2009)
[38] Ghanam, Y., Park, S., Maurer, F.: A Test-Driven Approach to
Establishing and Managing Agile Product Lines, In: Proceed-
ings of the 5th Software Product Lines Testing Workshop in
conjunction with SPLC’08, pp. 151–156 (2008)
[39] Ghanam, Y., Maurer, F.: An Iterative Model for Agile Product
Line Engineering. In: The SPLC Doctoral Symposium, 2008 -
in conjunction with the SPLC’08, pp. 377–384 (2008)
[40] Ghanam, Y., Maurer, F.: Extreme Product Line Engineering:
Managing Variability and Traceability via Executable Specifi-
cations. In: Agile Conference, AGILE ’09, IEEE Computer
Society, pp. 41–4 (2009)
[41] Ghanam, Y., Maurer, F.: Extreme Product Line Engineering
Refactoring for Variability: A Test-Driven Approach. In: Pro-
ceedings of 11th International IV Conference on Agile Pro-
cesses in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming,
XP 2010, LNBIP, vol. 48, pp. 43–57, Springer, Heidelberg
(2010)
[42] Neiva, D.F.S.: RiPLE-RE: A Requirements Engineering Pro-
cess for Software Product Lines, M.Sc. Dissertation, Univer-
sidade Federal de Pernambuco, Brazil (2009)
[43] Alves, V., Niu, N., Alves, C., Valença, G.: Requirements En-
gineering for Software Product Lines: A Systematic Literature
Review. In: Information and Software Technology, vol. 52(8),
pp. 806–820 (2010)
[44] Díaz, J., Pérez, J., Alarcón, P.P., Garbajosa, J.: Agile Product
Line Engineering – A Systematic Literature Review. In: Soft-
ware Practice and Experience, vol. 41(8), pp. 921–941 (2011)
[45] da Silva, I.F. , Neto, P., O'Leary, P., de Almeida, E., de Lemos
Meira, S.R.: Agile Software product lines: a systematic map-
ping study, Software: Practice and Experience, vol. 41(8), pp.
899–920 (2011)
[46] Farahani, F. F., Ramsin, R.: Methodologies for Agile Product
Line Engineering: A Survey and Evaluation. In: Proceedings
of the 13th International Conference SoMeT_14, Amsterdam:
IOS Press BV, pp.545-564 (2014)
[47] Elshandidy, H.: Behaviour-Driven Requirements Engineering
for Agile Product Line Engineering. In: 2019 IEEE 27th Inter-
national Requirements Engineering Conference (RE). Jeju Is-
land, Korea (South). 434-439 (2019)
[48] Apel, S., Batory, D., Kstner, C., Saake, G., Feature-Oriented
Software Product Lines: Concepts and Implementation.
Springer Publishing Company. (2013)
[49] Cucumber, https://cucumber.io/ , last accessed 2019/05/05
[50] Wynne, M., Hellesoy, A., The Cucumber Book: Behaviour-
Driven Development for Testers and Developers, Pragmatic
Bookshelf (2012)
[51] Trello: https://trello.com/
